A critical aspect of a programming language is the means it provides for
using names to refer to computational objects. We say that the name
identifies a _variable_ whose _value_ is the object.

In the Scheme dialect of Lisp, we name things with `define`. Typing

```lisp
(define size 2)
```

causes the interpreter to associate the value 2 with the name
`size`.[^⁸] Once the name `size` has been associated with the
number 2, we can refer to the value 2 by name:

```lisp
size
2

(* 5 size)
10
```

Here are further examples of the use of `define`:

```lisp
(define pi 3.14159)
(define radius 10)

(* pi (* radius radius))
314.159

(define circumference (* 2 pi radius))

circumference
62.8318
```

`Define` is our language’s simplest means of abstraction, for it allows
us to use simple names to refer to the results of compound operations,
such as the `circumference` computed above. In general, computational
objects may have very complex structures, and it would be extremely
inconvenient to have to remember and repeat their details each time we
want to use them. Indeed, complex programs are constructed by building,
step by step, computational objects of increasing complexity. The
interpreter makes this step-by-step program construction particularly
convenient because name-object associations can be created incrementally
in successive interactions. This feature encourages the incremental
development and testing of programs and is largely responsible for the
fact that a Lisp program usually consists of a large number of
relatively simple procedures.

It should be clear that the possibility of associating values with
symbols and later retrieving them means that the interpreter must
maintain some sort of memory that keeps track of the name-object pairs.
This memory is called the _environment_ (more precisely the _global
environment_, since we will see later that a computation may involve a
number of different environments).[^⁹]

[^⁸]:
    In this book, we do not show the interpreter’s response to
    evaluating definitions, since this is highly implementation-dependent.

[^⁹]:
    will show that this
    notion of environment is crucial, both for understanding how the
    interpreter works and for implementing interpreters.
