`Sqrt` is our first example of a process defined by a set of mutually
defined procedures. Notice that the definition of `sqrt-iter` is
_recursive_; that is, the procedure is defined in terms of itself. The
idea of being able to define a procedure in terms of itself may be
disturbing; it may seem unclear how such a “circular” definition could
make sense at all, much less specify a well-defined process to be
carried out by a computer. This will be addressed more carefully in
[1.2](1_002e2.xhtml#g_t1_002e2). But first let’s consider some other
important points illustrated by the `sqrt` example.

Observe that the problem of computing square roots breaks up naturally
into a number of subproblems: how to tell whether a guess is good
enough, how to improve a guess, and so on. Each of these tasks is
accomplished by a separate procedure. The entire `sqrt` program can be
viewed as a cluster of procedures (shown in [Figure
1.2](#Figure-1_002e2)) that mirrors the decomposition of the problem
into subproblems.

SVG

**Figure 1.2:** Procedural decomposition of the `sqrt` program.

The importance of this decomposition strategy is not simply that one is
dividing the program into parts. After all, we could take any large
program and divide it into parts—the first ten lines, the next ten
lines, the next ten lines, and so on. Rather, it is crucial that each
procedure accomplishes an identifiable task that can be used as a module
in defining other procedures. For example, when we define the
`good-enough?` procedure in terms of `square`, we are able to regard the
`square` procedure as a “black box.” We are not at that moment concerned
with _how_ the procedure computes its result, only with the fact that it
computes the square. The details of how the square is computed can be
suppressed, to be considered at a later time. Indeed, as far as the
`good-enough?` procedure is concerned, `square` is not quite a procedure
but rather an abstraction of a procedure, a so-called _procedural
abstraction_. At this level of abstraction, any procedure that computes
the square is equally good.

Thus, considering only the values they return, the following two
procedures for squaring a number should be indistinguishable. Each takes
a numerical argument and produces the square of that number as the
value.[^²⁵]

```lisp
(define (square x) (* x x))

(define (square x)
  (exp (double (log x))))

(define (double x) (+ x x))
```

So a procedure definition should be able to suppress detail. The users
of the procedure may not have written the procedure themselves, but may
have obtained it from another programmer as a black box. A user should
not need to know how the procedure is implemented in order to use it.

## Local names

One detail of a procedure’s implementation that should not matter to the
user of the procedure is the implementer’s choice of names for the
procedure’s formal parameters. Thus, the following procedures should not
be distinguishable:

```lisp
(define (square x) (* x x))
(define (square y) (* y y))
```

This principle—that the meaning of a procedure should be independent of
the parameter names used by its author—seems on the surface to be
self-evident, but its consequences are profound. The simplest
consequence is that the parameter names of a procedure must be local to
the body of the procedure. For example, we used `square` in the
definition of `good-enough?` in our square-root procedure:

```lisp
(define (good-enough? guess x)
  (< (abs (- (square guess) x)) 0.001))
```

The intention of the author of `good-enough?` is to determine if the
square of the first argument is within a given tolerance of the second
argument. We see that the author of `good-enough?` used the name `guess`
to refer to the first argument and `x` to refer to the second argument.
The argument of `square` is `guess`. If the author of `square` used `x`
(as above) to refer to that argument, we see that the `x` in
`good-enough?` must be a different `x` than the one in `square`. Running
the procedure `square` must not affect the value of `x` that is used by
`good-enough?`, because that value of `x` may be needed by
`good-enough?` after `square` is done computing.

If the parameters were not local to the bodies of their respective
procedures, then the parameter `x` in `square` could be confused with
the parameter `x` in `good-enough?`, and the behavior of `good-enough?`
would depend upon which version of `square` we used. Thus, `square`
would not be the black box we desired.

A formal parameter of a procedure has a very special role in the
procedure definition, in that it doesn’t matter what name the formal
parameter has. Such a name is called a _bound variable_, and we say that
the procedure definition _binds_ its formal parameters. The meaning of a
procedure definition is unchanged if a bound variable is consistently
renamed throughout the definition.[^²⁶] If a variable is not
bound, we say that it is _free_. The set of expressions for which a
binding defines a name is called the _scope_ of that name. In a
procedure definition, the bound variables declared as the formal
parameters of the procedure have the body of the procedure as their
scope.

In the definition of `good-enough?` above, `guess` and `x` are bound
variables but `<`, `-`, `abs`, and `square` are free. The meaning of
`good-enough?` should be independent of the names we choose for `guess`
and `x` so long as they are distinct and different from `<`, `-`, `abs`,
and `square`. (If we renamed `guess` to `abs` we would have introduced a
bug by _capturing_ the variable `abs`. It would have changed from free
to bound.) The meaning of `good-enough?` is not independent of the names
of its free variables, however. It surely depends upon the fact
(external to this definition) that the symbol `abs` names a procedure
for computing the absolute value of a number. `Good-enough?` will
compute a different function if we substitute `cos` for `abs` in its
definition.

## Internal definitions and block structure

We have one kind of name isolation available to us so far: The formal
parameters of a procedure are local to the body of the procedure. The
square-root program illustrates another way in which we would like to
control the use of names. The existing program consists of separate
procedures:

```lisp
(define (sqrt x)
  (sqrt-iter 1.0 x))

(define (sqrt-iter guess x)
  (if (good-enough? guess x)
      guess
      (sqrt-iter (improve guess x) x)))

(define (good-enough? guess x)
  (< (abs (- (square guess) x)) 0.001))

(define (improve guess x)
  (average guess (/ x guess)))
```

The problem with this program is that the only procedure that is
important to users of `sqrt` is `sqrt`. The other procedures
(`sqrt-iter`, `good-enough?`, and `improve`) only clutter up their
minds. They may not define any other procedure called `good-enough?` as
part of another program to work together with the square-root program,
because `sqrt` needs it. The problem is especially severe in the
construction of large systems by many separate programmers. For example,
in the construction of a large library of numerical procedures, many
numerical functions are computed as successive approximations and thus
might have procedures named `good-enough?` and `improve` as auxiliary
procedures. We would like to localize the subprocedures, hiding them
inside `sqrt` so that `sqrt` could coexist with other successive
approximations, each having its own private `good-enough?` procedure. To
make this possible, we allow a procedure to have internal definitions
that are local to that procedure. For example, in the square-root
problem we can write

```lisp
(define (sqrt x)
  (define (good-enough? guess x)
    (< (abs (- (square guess) x)) 0.001))
  (define (improve guess x)
    (average guess (/ x guess)))
  (define (sqrt-iter guess x)
    (if (good-enough? guess x)
        guess
        (sqrt-iter (improve guess x) x)))
  (sqrt-iter 1.0 x))
```

Such nesting of definitions, called _block structure_, is basically the
right solution to the simplest name-packaging problem. But there is a
better idea lurking here. In addition to internalizing the definitions
of the auxiliary procedures, we can simplify them. Since `x` is bound in
the definition of `sqrt`, the procedures `good-enough?`, `improve`, and
`sqrt-iter`, which are defined internally to `sqrt`, are in the scope of
`x`. Thus, it is not necessary to pass `x` explicitly to each of these
procedures. Instead, we allow `x` to be a free variable in the internal
definitions, as shown below. Then `x` gets its value from the argument
with which the enclosing procedure `sqrt` is called. This discipline is
called _lexical scoping_.[^²⁷]

```lisp
(define (sqrt x)
  (define (good-enough? guess)
    (< (abs (- (square guess) x)) 0.001))
  (define (improve guess)
    (average guess (/ x guess)))
  (define (sqrt-iter guess)
    (if (good-enough? guess)
        guess
        (sqrt-iter (improve guess))))
  (sqrt-iter 1.0))
```

We will use block structure extensively to help us break up large
programs into tractable pieces.[^²⁸] The idea of block structure
originated with the programming language Algol 60. It appears in most
advanced programming languages and is an important tool for helping to
organize the construction of large programs.

[^²⁵]:
    It is not even clear which of these procedures is a more
    efficient implementation. This depends upon the hardware available.
    There are machines for which the “obvious” implementation is the less
    efficient one. Consider a machine that has extensive tables of
    logarithms and antilogarithms stored in a very efficient manner.

[^²⁶]:
    The concept of consistent renaming is actually subtle and
    difficult to define formally. Famous logicians have made embarrassing
    errors here.

[^²⁷]:
    Lexical scoping dictates that free variables in a
    procedure are taken to refer to bindings made by enclosing procedure
    definitions; that is, they are looked up in the environment in which the
    procedure was defined. We will see how this works in detail in chapter 3
    when we study environments and the detailed behavior of the interpreter.

[^²⁸]:
    Embedded definitions must come first in a procedure body.
    The management is not responsible for the consequences of running
    programs that intertwine definition and use.
