One easy way to get started at programming is to examine some typical
interactions with an interpreter for the Scheme dialect of Lisp. Imagine
that you are sitting at a computer terminal. You type an _expression_,
and the interpreter responds by displaying the result of its
_evaluating_ that expression.

One kind of primitive expression you might type is a number. (More
precisely, the expression that you type consists of the numerals that
represent the number in base 10.) If you present Lisp with a number

```lisp
486
```

the interpreter will respond by printing[^⁵]

```lisp
486
```

Expressions representing numbers may be combined with an expression
representing a primitive procedure (such as `+` or `*`) to form a
compound expression that represents the application of the procedure to
those numbers. For example:

```lisp
(+ 137 349)
486

(- 1000 334)
666

(* 5 99)
495

(/ 10 5)
2

(+ 2.7 10)
12.7
```

Expressions such as these, formed by delimiting a list of expressions
within parentheses in order to denote procedure application, are called
_combinations_. The leftmost element in the list is called the
_operator_, and the other elements are called _operands_. The value of a
combination is obtained by applying the procedure specified by the
operator to the _arguments_ that are the values of the operands.

The convention of placing the operator to the left of the operands is
known as _prefix notation_, and it may be somewhat confusing at first
because it departs significantly from the customary mathematical
convention. Prefix notation has several advantages, however. One of them
is that it can accommodate procedures that may take an arbitrary number
of arguments, as in the following examples:

```lisp
(+ 21 35 12 7)
75

(* 25 4 12)
1200
```

No ambiguity can arise, because the operator is always the leftmost
element and the entire combination is delimited by the parentheses.

A second advantage of prefix notation is that it extends in a
straightforward way to allow combinations to be _nested_, that is, to
have combinations whose elements are themselves combinations:

```lisp
(+ (* 3 5) (- 10 6))
19
```

There is no limit (in principle) to the depth of such nesting and to the
overall complexity of the expressions that the Lisp interpreter can
evaluate. It is we humans who get confused by still relatively simple
expressions such as

```lisp
(+ (* 3 (+ (* 2 4) (+ 3 5))) (+ (- 10 7) 6))
```

which the interpreter would readily evaluate to be 57. We can help
ourselves by writing such an expression in the form

```lisp
(+ (* 3
      (+ (* 2 4)
         (+ 3 5)))
   (+ (- 10 7)
      6))
```

following a formatting convention known as _pretty-printing_, in which
each long combination is written so that the operands are aligned
vertically. The resulting indentations display clearly the structure of
the expression.[^⁶]

Even with complex expressions, the interpreter always operates in the
same basic cycle: It reads an expression from the terminal, evaluates
the expression, and prints the result. This mode of operation is often
expressed by saying that the interpreter runs in a _read-eval-print
loop_. Observe in particular that it is not necessary to explicitly
instruct the interpreter to print the value of the
expression.[^⁷]

[^⁵]:
    Throughout this book, when we wish to emphasize the
    distinction between the input typed by the user and the response printed
    by the interpreter, we will show the latter in slanted characters.

[^⁶]:
    Lisp systems typically provide features to aid the user in
    formatting expressions. Two especially useful features are one that
    automatically indents to the proper pretty-print position whenever a new
    line is started and one that highlights the matching left parenthesis
    whenever a right parenthesis is typed.

[^⁷]:
    Lisp obeys the convention that every expression has a value.
    This convention, together with the old reputation of Lisp as an
    inefficient language, is the source of the quip by Alan Perlis
    (paraphrasing Oscar Wilde) that “Lisp programmers know the value of
    everything but the cost of nothing.”
